Tom Crean: The Roots of Ambition

By Michael Pointer

michael.pointer@indystar.com

This story was first published January 27, 2013

MOUNT PLEASANT, Mich. — He was a benchwarmer on his high school basketball team, a decent shooter but not strong or athletic. Even friends say he was easy to push around on the court.

A scan through box scores during his senior year at Mount Pleasant High shows he seldom played, and when he did, the score line usually read zeros across.

But Tom Crean was outgoing and popular, voted best dressed in his senior class, according to the school's 1984 yearbook. He had a fondness for Izod polo shirts popular at the time, sometimes with the collar rolled up.

Beneath the surface, though, he watched as his parents' marriage fell apart and his father became more and more distant. He had a serious health scare as a high school freshman, collapsing in the school cafeteria.

That Crean became a preeminent college basketball coach — without being from a basketball family, without being a great student, without money to help carry the dream — is a testament to a drive and relentlessness that even longtime basketball observers describe as unique.

Where did that drive come from? Crean has talked often about his connection to the Harbaugh family — especially with his brothers-in-law, Jim and John Harbaugh, coaching against each other in the upcoming Super Bowl — but he hasn't talked much about what forged him while growing up in Mount Pleasant, a town of 26,000.

It is home to Central Michigan University, but the Creans hardly ran with the college crowd after moving there in 1968 from neighboring Harrison, Mich.

"We didn't have insurance and I still remember his hospital bill," said Crean's father, also named Tom, about his son's birth. "It was $250. Imagine that today."

The elder Crean moved the family to Mount Pleasant when he got a job as a barber in a state-run home for the mentally ill there. He later worked in patient care.

Marjorie Crean, Tom's mother, worked a variety of jobs, including as the secretary at a marble company. A sister, Michelle, was born in 1970. The Creans also took in foster children.

The family moved often until settling in a home on the east side of town, near where Tom and Marjorie owned and operated apartments. The Creans were active in a nearby Assembly of God church. For a time, the younger Crean's parents thought he would become a minister.

But when the basketball bug bit, it bit hard.

Tom Deromedi, who attended middle school and high school with Crean, and is a son of former Central Michigan football coach Herb Deromedi, said Mount Pleasant was similar to mid-sized towns in Indiana like Marion and Kokomo: Hoops was king.

In high school, Crean was a regular at basketball camps across the state — not as a player, but as a sort of junior talent evaluator and someone helping coaches with whatever they needed. Before the internet made it easy to track players, he knew every top player in the state from downtown Detroit to the Upper Peninsula.

To get to where he is, the man who revived a beloved institution — IU basketball — would have to compensate for not having played.

There are 45 head coaches in the Big Ten, ACC, Pac-12 and Big 12, not including an interim head coach. Only three did not play any college basketball.

One is Baylor's Scott Drew, who came from a basketball family. Another is Bruce Weber of Kansas State, who was set to play college baseball before his school dropped the program.

And Crean.

"I felt like I had to work harder," he said. "But I had no trouble doing that."

***

During his freshman year at Mount Pleasant High, Crean collapsed in the cafeteria and missed several weeks of school.

Crean said the cause was low blood sugar because of Epstein Barr Syndrome, which can lead to mononucleosis. That set him back academically, but he admits being an indifferent student.

"I was always playing catch-up in high school and I didn't take it as seriously as I should have," Crean said. "I was way more locked in on sports."

Crean's sister Michelle saw him turn his energy toward learning basketball.

"I think he truly loved the game and he truly loved the coaching aspect," she said. "He was close to his coaches. I think that's the part that stood out for him. It never bothered him that he wasn't the awesome player."

At the beginning of Crean's junior season, then-Mount Pleasant coach Denny Kuiper nearly cut him from the team. But he soon changed his mind, realizing how much the young man loved the game.

"If he hadn't done that, I probably would have let basketball go," said Crean, who remains close with Kuiper.

Kuiper kept Crean around as a practice player and let him tag along when he scouted opponents. He eventually let him scout teams on his own, and got him into a few games as a player.

Crean continued his basketball education at coaching clinics. He would introduce himself to some of the top coaches in the country, including Jim Boeheim of Syracuse and Bobby Cremins, then with Georgia Tech. Crean also remembered attending a clinic in Bloomington, age 19, featuring Bob Knight.

"He was very unique," Deromedi said. "He knew how to network."

His peers noticed that, too. They marveled at how much time Crean spent on the game and how he was willing to ask anyone for help.

"Whenever we had a birthday party or something where we would all get together, we would hear Tom can't go," said Tim Otteman, a high school teammate of Crean's. "He was working a basketball camp."

Crean enrolled at Central Michigan after graduation, but those close to him say he had little interest in college. He went because he knew he would need a college degree to advance in the coaching profession. (He eventually graduated from Central Michigan in 1989 with a degree in parks and recreation.) As a college freshman, Crean worked as an assistant coach at Mount Pleasant High and later interviewed for a job about 15 miles away, at Alma College.

Head coach Ralph Pim had been an assistant at Central Michigan and remembered seeing this freshman, Crean, hanging around the gym watching practice. He met him at an Arby's restaurant to conduct the interview.

Pim recalled Crean's face lighting up when he got the job offer.

"It was a look I will truly always remember," Pim said. "If anything, it reinforced my feeling that I was doing the right thing."

Alma isn't known as a men's basketball school. The only hoops trophies in the display case in the school gymnasium are for the women's team, which won the NCAA Division III title in 1992. But the Scots had winning records in all three seasons Crean was there, including a 17-7 record in 1988-89. They have had just one winning season since.

At Alma, Crean was coaching athletes his own age, but that wasn't an issue, former player Andy Mangin said. Practice was all business — Pim had a no-smiling rule.

But Mangin said Crean did sometimes hang out with players.

"I think he learned how to build relationships with players at Alma, which has been effective for him over the years," Mangin said. "Not just players. He treated my mom and dad like family."

Deromedi would drive to Alma to watch Crean.

"He just looked like a natural," he said. "He looked like he belonged there, which is probably the best way to put it. You could tell he wasn't going to do anything else."

But it wasn't just a love of hoops driving Crean.

"Tom being the oldest child, I saw him view himself as the man of the house," said childhood friend Ray Kelly, who was Crean's best man at his 1993 wedding. "I saw him take responsibility for his mom's situation. He was not just a big brother, but almost a dad to his sister. I just saw him playing a much older role.

"That's what I think drives Tom. Not just because he was the oldest child, but he felt like had to take care of his sister and mom."

***

Crean's networking paid off. He became friends with a Michigan State assistant coach named Tom Izzo, who recommended him to head coach Jud Heathcote for a graduate assistant's position in 1989.

Heathcote admits he wasn't interested at first, because Crean had virtually no playing background. But Izzo convinced him to interview Crean.

"This guy is off the charts in what he knows about players," Heathcote recalled Izzo saying. "He's always thinking about basketball. Not anything else."

Crean's next job, at Western Kentucky, came after head coach Ralph Willard interviewed him as a favor to Heathcote.

Crean had no work experience in the south. But when Willard asked him for the top prospects in and around Atlanta, where he wanted to recruit heavily, Crean ticked off 15 names off the top of his head.

Once again, Crean's pre-internet knowledge about players made an impression.

"It just blew you away, his almost limitless desire to know what was going on," said Pat Forde of Yahoo Sports, who met Crean when he was at Western Kentucky and Forde was a columnist in Louisville.

While at Western Kentucky, Crean met his future wife, Joani Harbaugh, whom he married in 1993. Her father Jack was the head football coach at Western. She also had a couple of brothers named John and Jim.

After four seasons at Western Kentucky, Crean followed Willard to Pittsburgh for one season before returning to Michigan State as an assistant under Izzo. The Spartans' record improved in each of his four seasons there, culminating in a 33-5 mark and a trip to the Final Four in 1999.

"He could talk Xs and Os with anyone," said Jack Ebling, a former Michigan State beat writer and columnist for the Lansing State Journal. "And in recruiting, he was a genius. Him and Izzo might have been the best recruiting combo the Big Ten has ever seen."

Even before Michigan State won the 2000 national title in Indianapolis, Crean was a hot prospect, and Marquette called. He took over as head coach at the place where legendary, eccentric coach Al McGuire had won a national title.

Crean was 33.

He spent nine seasons at Marquette, making the Final Four in 2003 with a team led by future NBA superstar Dwyane Wade. With NCAA violations about to gut IU's program, Crean took the job in Bloomington in 2008.

"This was a heart decision," he said after being hired at Indiana, "not a business decision."

Other matters of the heart have been more complicated for Crean.

***

Crean's father left home when he was in high school. He lives in Mount Pleasant. During an interview earlier this month, Tom Crean Sr. said he last spoke to his son in December 2011 after Indiana's game at Michigan State.

Crean, 76, knows he's missed a lot with his son over many years.

"We need to take a good long walk in the woods so we can have a nice talk," the elder Crean said.

Crean Sr. said he remains proud of his son. He escorted a reporter around Mount Pleasant, showing the homes where his son grew up. He proudly showed off a family photo album. He watches most of IU's games on television. He said it still seems unbelievable to see his son on the sideline.

He regrets not attending more of Crean's games in high school, but said he often worked evenings, and that prevented him from doing so.

"I know he's a good husband," the elder Crean said of the IU coach "He loves his wife. He loves his kids. As a family man, he's an A-plus. Maybe the mistakes we (his parents) made, he wasn't going to make them."

Crean, the son, said some of his best memories are attending sports events in Detroit with his dad, particularly baseball games at Tiger Stadium.

"I love my dad," he said. "I just don't see him very much. Hopefully, there will be a time for that. I pray for him every day."

The relationship between Crean and his mother and sister, however, is especially close.

"He gave me away at my wedding," Dean said. "I would have no one else do that."

Otteman and Deromedi remember seeing Crean's mother always attending his games or dropping him off for gatherings. Deromedi said he even wonders if Crean was attracted to coaching at a young age because it provided a father figure he was missing.

Fran Fraschilla, an ESPN analyst, former college head coach and groomsman in Crean's wedding, said his friend's story isn't unusual.

"It's not uncommon for a Tom Izzo, a Tom Crean, a Nick Saban, guys that come from humble backgrounds, (to) have this fear of failure," Fraschilla said. "(They think) 'In large part, as good as I am today, I don't want it taken away tomorrow, so I work even harder.' I think Tom has that fear of being that kid from Mount Pleasant that didn't make it."

Crean's friends also say that although he is still friendly, he has become more private during his tenure at IU. He has few confidants other than the Harbaughs. His wife has said he's focused completely on basketball and family.

"Some (coaches) have blinders on from October to March," Willard said. "Tom has them on from October to October."

Crean has become outwardly religious. His tweets and retweets are filled with spiritual advice or biblical verses. He said going through tough times early in his tenure at IU helped spark an interest in his religious roots.

"I grew up in church," Crean said. "I've never lost that. I've made my share of mistakes, but you realize as you get older that that's what it comes down to, that's what is most important."

In at least one sense, Crean isn't much different from that kid in Mount Pleasant. Basketball consumed him as a teenager. It consumes him as a 46-year-old leading one of the most tradition-rich programs in the country.

"Tom has a unique ability to dream pretty big," said Kuiper, who was a guidance counselor and basketball coach. "We would tell kids to dream really big and the sky is the limit. Tom actually believed it."